# **Search Engine Optimization**

Feel free to add your answers directly to this document.

SEO is an engineering discipline, focused on optimizing a website technically, both on-page and off-page to improve its visibility and rankings on search engines. Content creators can find their way in, but if you aren’t looking at search as an engineer you will get it wrong (you will suffer). SEO is crucial for increasing a website's visibility, attracting organic traffic, and ultimately driving conversions and business growth. 

# **SEO IS VALUABLE**

Businesses can achieve sustainable growth through increased organic traffic and improved online presence.

* **Fixed Cost**: Compared to paid advertising, SEO is a cost-effective way to drive traffic over the long term and its ROI should be easy to calculate because its costs are fixed.   
* **Organic 1st**: From a technical and structural standpoint, your website should be positioned to win from day 1\.  This reinforces the performance of other channels and creates stability in baseline organic performance. If technical/structural rules are defined and followed from inception the system will always work in your favor, requiring very little maintenance. In most cases, it’s not our reality but it is our philosophy.  
* **Increased Visibility**: Higher rankings in SERPs leads to greater visibility and more traffic.   
* **Credibility and Trust**: High-ranking sites are often perceived as more credible and trustworthy by users.  
* **User Experience**: Optimizing for SEO often improves the overall user experience, leading to higher engagement and satisfaction. DON’T CONFUSE SEO WITH UX/UI,  just understand that both search engines and people benefit from well-organized information, pages, and site structures.  
* **Competitive Advantage**: Effective SEO strategies can give businesses a competitive edge in their industry.  
* **Search Engines are Everywhere**: Any platform with Search can be understood and optimized. Prioritize your audience.

# **SEARCH ENGINES ARE LIBRARY SYSTEMS**

Search engines are libraries—information systems that rely on categorization and structured data to function properly. Google’s own API documentation refers to its indexation database as “Alexandria,” a reference to the famed Library of Alexandria, which is considered one of the [greatest libraries of the ancient world](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Library_of_Alexandria). 

* Systems to Categorize  
  * Library Systems  
    * Dewey Decimal System  
  * Search Engine Systems  
    * Local Search  
      * Map Packs  
    * YMYL  
      * Ecommerce  
    * Informational  
    * Direct Answer Systems  
      * SGE  
* Curation (qualification)  
  * Quality is subjective so every library system will have some principles that guide the selection of content. Google needs to rely on behavioral signals to assess quality because search engines can’t directly read content on the web with any sense of quality.

The key thing to remember is that search engines, like Google search, are powered by algorithms (math) used to categorize content and qualify/curate that content for users. While Google doesn’t openly share the underlying math it can be understood by observing changes in the SERPS over time.

# **COMPONENTS OF SEO**

1. [**Technical SEO**](https://docs.google.com/document/u/0/d/1nKah9e7MlX-aKSWC9r6eIuhBGnRYVgwJXuyT1qo-1eY/edit): Ensuring that a website is technically sound and can be easily crawled and indexed by search engines.  
   * Site Architecture: Clear, logical site structure.  
   * Crawlability: Proper use of robots.txt, sitemaps, and URL structures.  
   * Mobile-Friendliness: Responsive design and mobile usability..  
   * Security: Use of HTTPS to secure user data.  
2. [**On-Page SEO**](https://docs.google.com/document/u/0/d/1gIBln9wSVjflnituDM6gx9fKl6ZPdr9ltDUuJ4heumc/edit): Optimizing individual pages to rank higher and earn more relevant traffic.  
   * Keyword Research: Identifying relevant keywords to target.  
   * Content Quality: Creating high-quality, valuable, and relevant content.  
   * Title Tags and Meta Descriptions: Crafting compelling and optimized meta tags.  
   * Header Tags: Using H1, H2, H3 tags for better content organization.  
   * Internal Linking: Creating a logical flow and structure with internal links.  
3. [**Content**](https://docs.google.com/document/u/0/d/1Y8pkogDQccJiQpF_HqC1HCiXnSIrsVJRjtZNhHiZUrQ/edit)**:** Keyword-optimized content designed to rank and end searches.  
   * Search volume is a measure of interest and value  
   * Pages are optimized to answer queries and end the search Search intent   
   * Key information is present, consistent, and complete.  
4. [**Internal Linking**](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ZBpd0C97wouR0dp6sv863A5XteFAclhJquT2IfcfQig/edit#heading=h.j11su7sji4le): Content is [internally linked](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ZBpd0C97wouR0dp6sv863A5XteFAclhJquT2IfcfQig/edit#heading=h.j11su7sji4le) to maximize its value.  
5. [**Off-Page SEO**](https://docs.google.com/document/u/0/d/1xiAIKH-qWGkWqZzT1Kj-059q5GM_v_4b2iVgCo7NQpI/edit): Building a website's reputation and authority through external means.  
   * Backlinks: Acquiring high-quality, relevant backlinks from authoritative sites.  
   * Social Signals: Engagement on social media platforms.  
   * Guest Posting: Writing articles for other reputable websites.  
   * Influencer Outreach: Building relationships with influencers and thought leaders.

# **ROCKET CLICKS SEO BEST PRACTICES**

Best practices prescribed by Google or any other search engine must be understood through the lens of that search engine as a business. It is best to question any SEO advice that doesn’t have a clear technical explanation or rationalization. The costs associated with maintaining a search engine are simply TOO HIGH to accommodate many of the idealized quality assessments many SEO practitioners believe exist (they do not).

* Technical Audits: Conduct regular SEO audits to identify and fix technical issues, improve on-page elements, and enhance overall site performance.  
  * Ongoing Technical Maintenance is always a priority  
* Algo Monitoring: Using tools like Google Analytics and Google Search Console to monitor performance and make data-driven decisions.  
* Link Building:   
  * Ongoing link building a diverse and high-quality backlink profile boosts authority and allows a site to rank for more competitive (valuable) searches.   
  * Citations change, die, important sites are always changing  
* Content Audits:  
  * Quality Content Ends the Search-provides an answer to the query  
  * Information is complete and consistent

## **Realities of Google Search**

Things we believe to be true about Google that impact SEO:

* Organic search is 100% cost to Google.   
* Search drives revenue via advertising and new features that allow for monetization via advertising revenue  
* Quality search results equate to maintaining platform dominance and attention to support ad revenue    
* Google will make cost decisions about “quality search results”   
* Quality can be sacrificed if platform dominance is maintained  
* Those decisions are engineering problems that often rely on simple solutions, not complex solutions: complex solutions are expensive, simple solutions are cheap  
* SERP features may change a lot but the algorithm changes very little 

* Google cannot “read your website” to understand the quality it needs to interpret 

# **SEO IS NOT…**

While SEO overlaps with several technical and marketing disciplines, it’s important to draw clear distinctions between them. The best SEO may be a mediocre web developer and the best web developer may be a terrible SEO—although they both leverage similar technologies (if not the same) they are motivated by different, unrelated factors. The most common disciplines confused with SEO are:

* Web Development  
  * There is overlap with SEO especially in understanding HTML and core website infrastructure related to hosting and serving website domain names. An SEO’s understanding of Web Development can be fairly basic. However, Web Developers often make very competent SEO’s due to their advanced understanding of web technologies and engineering  
* UI/UX  
  * End the Search — fast/easy answers, key takeaways, goal completion, answer right away, pogo-sticking not bounce

* CRO

  * CRO applies UI/UX principles and tests for improvement with the goal of making the good better. CRO looks for small cumulative wins where SEO is often targeting much larger, net new opportunities.

* Content Marketing

  * Content marketing involves creating and sharing valuable, relevant content to attract and engage a target audience, ultimately driving profitable customer actions. It builds brand loyalty and trust through informative, entertaining, and consistent content, but is rarely search volume or a clear audience to target for organic traffic. 

# **SOURCES OF TRUTH**

* Technical Documentation  
  * [Google](https://hexdocs.pm/google_api_content_warehouse/0.4.0/api-reference.html)/Yandex API documentation leaks  
  * [Developer Guides](https://developers.google.com/search/docs/fundamentals/how-search-works)  
* [Patents](https://www.seobythesea.com/)  
* Single variant testing

The [Search Quality Raters Guide](https://developers.google.com/search/blog/2023/11/search-quality-rater-guidelines-update) is fluffy and aspirational. It is useful to read this document as a list of things that are difficult, expensive, or impossible to automate in Google search. If anything. There are important and valuable definitions and contexts for concepts like EEAT and YMYL but they must be understood from an engineering point of view, not overly simplified as they are in this document. Subjective distinctions about “quality” are difficult and expensive to make algorithmically. 